# Internship proposal for BIOL0041 in 2023

If you are here, you might be interested in doing an internship working on ShareYourCloning.

You might not know know much about web development, Open Science or data standardisation, but don't worry! This internship can be an opportunity for you to get started with it. Here are some basics to understand the use-case we are trying to address.

## Intro

ShareYourCloning is a project that wants to develop:

* A standard format to describe molecular cloning.
* A web application to with an intuitive user interface where researchers can simulate cloning and export in an open file format that can be used by others.

You can try the web application in [this link](https://shareyourcloning.org/). There is a video explaining how to use it.

## What does it mean to document molecular cloning?

In the lab, researchers create new molecules of DNA by combining fragments of several DNA molecules, using PCR, CRISPr, restriction and ligation enzymes, Gibson assembly, etc. However, we do not have an open standard to document the steps that are followed to generate a DNA sequence from its parents.

## Why ShareYourCloning?

Ideally, a laboratory database should track the provenance of plasmids, strains, and cell lines through cloning steps up to their entry into the database. However, this is not possible with current software tools, and laboratories implement ad hoc solutions which are necessarily inconsistent, differ between collections and may diverge in time within a single collection.

While there are open standards to describe DNA sequences and Open-Source libraries to simulate cloning, no open data model exists to document sequence provenance. Conversely, most researchers use commercial software to simulate cloning, but only some products track the lineage of sequences. Even then, provenance information can only be accessed by opening files in a proprietary desktop application and cannot be exported to an open file format, completely preventing the integration of this information with other software tools.

Lack of standards also means that published data is not immediately ingestible by repositories and knowledge bases requiring manual curation. This manual work cannot be replaced by text mining because information is often not provided at all.

The goal of ShareYourCloning is to provide an easy-to-use alternative that requires no extra effort from researchers and captures the data in an interoperable format from the planning stage. Data can then be seamlessly incorporated into a repository or knowledge base, exchanged with colleagues, or integrated with other tools.

## What will you learn during your internship?

You can choose what part of the project suits you better:

* The frontend of the application using JavaScript / React. See [this repository](https://github.com/manulera/ShareYourCloning_frontend).
* The backend of the application using python / FastAPI. See [this repository](https://github.com/manulera/ShareYourCloning_backend).
* Adding support for the [Synthetic Biology Open Language](https://sbolstandard.org/) as a data model.
* Extending [pydna](https://github.com/BjornFJohansson/pydna) a python molecular cloning library.

Regardless of what you pick, you will learn best practices in Open Source software development, including:
  * Dependency managers
  * Pull Requests and how to work with GitHub
  * Tests
  * Continuous integration / deployment
  * GitHub Actions

Keep in mind that this is not a traditional bioinformatics project and does not involve data analysis. It is best suited for students looking to work in bioinformatic services such as databases and repositories, research software development, data curation and standardisation, data stewardship or Open Science.

